Blog post about r-universe/bioc collab (#1275)
ropensci/roweb3: content/blog/2026-04-08-r-universe-bioc/index.md

---
slug: "r-universe-bioc"
title: Modernizing Bioconductor Infrastructure with R-universe
author:
  - The rOpenSci Team
  - The Bioconductor Team
date: '2026-03-25'
tags:
  - r-universe
  - infrastructure
  - bioconductor
photogallery: true
featured: true

> description: ""

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: ""
params:
  doi: "10.59350/sj9wy-g8055"
```

At the same time, the infrastructure that supports such a long-standing and large-scale project inevitably accumulates technical debt. Legacy build systems, bespoke tooling, and historically grown workflows add up to costly and unsustainable maintenance work. For this reason, R-universe is collaborating with Bioconductor to gradually modernize parts of its infrastructure, while accommodating the project’s scale, governance, and established processes. In turn, Bioconductor is helping R-Universe expand and refine its features as we have learned to serve the complex needs of the Bioconductor community.

This collaboration reflects a core principle of R-universe as an R Consortium Infrastructure Steering Committee (ISC) top-level project: supporting reviewed package repositories such as rOpenSci and Bioconductor, and providing modern, open, and reusable infrastructure that strengthens the broader R ecosystem.

## A Shared Mission: Tooling for Managed Repositories

> R-universe was designed as a next-generation package distribution and build system for R. It provides:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For those new to R-universe, it was designed as a next-generation package distribution and build system for R which provides:
```

  * Continuous building and checking of R packages across platforms  
  * Binary packages for Windows, macOS, Linux, and WebAssembly  
  * Transparent and reproducible build environments managed via GitHub actions  
  * Dashboards and metadata apis for monitoring ecosystem health and activity  
  * CRAN-like package repositories with discoverable metrics and documentation

From the outset, a key objective has been to support curated and reviewed communities — such as rOpenSci and Bioconductor — by offering modern infrastructure without requiring them to redesign their governance or review processes.

For Bioconductor, this means incrementally adopting piece-wise functionality, with consideration for established release cycles and quality control mechanisms:

  1. First, we have set up independent build and dashboard tooling, replicating processes from legacy Bioconductor build systems on r-universe infrastructure.  
  2. Then started mirroring windows/mac binaries produced on r-universe to bioconductor.  
  3. Next, we explore further integration of results and metadata produced by r-universe for bioconductor health/activity monitoring and aiding the curation processes.  

>   4. Potential future steps toward deeper automation and harmonization

Reviewer: I would flesh out step four or remove it and talk about what's next at the end of the post. Right now it doesn't add much.

> By taking small gradual steps towards adopting R-universe components, everyone gets the opportunity to experiment with new tooling and evaluate where adjustments may be needed in order to minimize disruption to existing practices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By gradually adopting R-universe components, Bioconductor maintainers and team members can experiment with the new tooling and adjustments can be made as needed to avoid disrupting existing practices.
```

A significant milestone in this collaboration is that Bioconductor now uses R-Universe to build the Windows and Mac binaries. Taking advantage of R-universe’s scalable, cloud-native build system has significantly reduced maintenance load on the Bioconductor team. Beyond binary distribution, we are currently working toward deeper integration of R-universe’s continuous check results into Bioconductor’s quality control and release processes. 

> ## Two Universes: Release and Development

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Two universes: Release and Development
```

Bioconductor maintains two distinct repositories:

* A **release** branch for stable packages  
* A **devel** branch for ongoing development and the next release cycle

To mirror this structure, we currently operate two dedicated R-universe instances:

* **Development branch:** [https://bioc.r-universe.dev](https://bioc.r-universe.dev)  
* **Release branch:** [https://bioc-release.r-universe.dev](https://bioc-release.r-universe.dev)

These universes integrate directly with Bioconductor’s existing Git infrastructure and provide continuous builds for packages in both branches.

Through the R-universe dashboard, package maintainers and users can:

  * Inspect cross-platform check results  

>   * Review extended BiocCheck diagnostics  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Review extended [BiocCheck](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/BiocCheck.html) diagnostics  
```

  * Monitor build logs and dependency graphs  
  * Explore rich package metadata and metrics  
  * Publish binary packages for Windows, macOS, and Linux

> This provides a familiar yet modern interface for Bioconductor contributors, aligned with what users increasingly expect from contemporary R package infrastructure.

Reviewer: What is a 'contemporary R package infrastructure'? What other examples are there out there to explain what 'users increasingly expect'? Could this be simplified?

```suggestion
This blends a modern R package dashboard with a familiar interface for Bioconductor contributors.
```

Information about each package is available on `https://bioc.r-universe.dev/{pkgname}`, for example https://bioc.r-universe.dev/DESeq2 shown below:

{{< figureforgallery src="https://docs.r-universe.dev/img/bioc-pkg.png" alt="screenshot of r-universe package" >}}

If this is the first time you visit R-universe, we recommend clicking the "Website Tour" button which will walk you through the most important information in 1 or 2 minutes.

> ## Technical Documentation for Bioconductor Maintainers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Technical documentation for Bioconductor maintainers
```

> The R-universe project maintains comprehensive technical documentation at [https://docs.r-universe.dev](https://docs.r-universe.dev). For Bioconductor specifically, we created a dedicated summarizing the most relevant topics for developers to get started with R-universe: [https://docs.r-universe.dev/bioconductor/](https://docs.r-universe.dev/bioconductor/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For those just getting started with R-universe, we have comprehensive technical documentation at [https://docs.r-universe.dev](https://docs.r-universe.dev). We also added a dedicated chapter for Bioconductor maintainers, summarizing the most relevant topics: [https://docs.r-universe.dev/bioconductor/](https://docs.r-universe.dev/bioconductor/).
```

As the collaboration evolves and new components get adopted, the documentation will continue to be expanded. The goal is to provide Bioconductor maintainers with a clear reference point for understanding how R-universe fits into their development workflow, while maintaining compatibility with the established practices that have made Bioconductor a successful project within the R community.

> ## Looking Ahead

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Looking ahead
```
